[ Music ]
[ Silence ]
>> Hi, I'm Lisa Garr, host
of Gaiam  Inspirations .
Are you making enough
money in your life?
If not, do you know
how much money you want
to make this year, next year,
and more importantly
is the question of why.
My guest today is one of
the featured visionaries
of  The Secret  and  New York
Times  bestselling author,
John Assaraf.
And he says if you want
to change your income,
you need to recalibrate
your financial set point.
So how do you do this?
Joining me today
is John Assaraf.
He's going to explain
some of his techniques
on the Neuroscience of Success.
Welcome [chuckles].
>> Hey Lisa, it's
great to be here.
>> It's great to have you here.
I love your smile.
You have such a warm smile.
I see you all the time
in my email [laughter].
>> Well, I love smiling and
love getting smiles right back.
>> Yes, you do.
So you have had a
lot of great mentors
in your life, haven't you?
Can you tell us a little
bit about your upbringing
and how mentors changed
your life?
>> Well, I -- I think
the reason that I ended
up with mentors is I
had a wonderful mother
and wonderful father who were
loving, caring, and kind,
but because they only went to
grade three and grade five,
I believe, in school, they
really didn't have the knowledge
and the skills of how to
operate in the real world other
than their, [background
sirens] you know,
paradigm of what was
possible for them.
>> [Background siren] They
finished school at grade three?
>> My -- my mother was grade
three, my father was grade five.
>> In what country?
>> They were living in Israel
in Morocco at the time...
>> Wow.
>> ...and in those days what
was most important was to go
out there and work and
make enough money to give
to the family so that
everybody could eat.
And so school wasn't
the priority for them.
And what I remember
is, you know,
there was always too much month
left at the end of the money
and many of the arguments...
>> Yeah [chuckles].
>> ...and many of the
fights in our household was
around the lack of money and
that there was always struggle
around not having enough and
trying to make ends meet.
And it's funny as I sit
here talking with you, I --
I remember the feeling of how
I hated to hear the screams
between my mother and father.
And unfortunately my father was
a gambler on horses and cards.
So even the money
that he did make...
>> Oh.
>> ...he would gamble
it away, lose it,
then end up in more debt.
And so that created
a lot of tension...
>> Yes.
>> ...and a lot of,
not physical pain,
but a lot of emotional pain
watching my parents just
argue about...
>> Specifically about money.
>> ...money and not having
enough and why was he doing that
and why -- why was his behavior
something he couldn't control.
And I really became
fascinated with, you know,
behavior at a very young age
and then I was introduced
to a wonderful mentor
who was kind and loving,
and willing to -- to share his
knowledge and his experience,
and his skills and his
strategies with me.
And he really gave me, for
the first time, when I was 19,
an opening -- like, you
know, like a window opened
and I was able to just
get through the window...
>> Yeah.
>> ...to see a different way
of thinking, and believing,
and behaving that had
transformed my life
and it was such a gift.
>> But you have to
be able to walk
through that opening though.
>> Yeah.
>> Many people will see it and
not know to walk through it.
What do you think gave you that
ability to walk through that,
to take the coaching...
>> Yeah.
>> ...to seek out the mentor?
>> I think in a couple of words,
shame, guilt, and embarrassment.
>> [Inaudible] to explain.
>> And so I felt less
than the other kids.
I felt ashamed at my
family's situation.
I felt guilty that I wasn't able
to -- to help and contribute.
When I was eight years
old I had a paper route.
I was delivering 100 newspapers
every morning even in the winter
in Montreal and giving
some of that money
to my mother and father to help.
I worked at the local
dry cleaning store.
pharmacy to make a little bit
of extra money, 15 cents an
hour, 20 cents an hour just
so we could have a
little bit extra,
so that I could have a little
bit of money in my pocket...
>> Yeah.
>> ...but also to give
some money to my parents,
to help pay for rent, to
help pay for some food.
But I felt embarrassed.
I felt ashamed.
I felt like I wasn't as
good as the other kids
who I thought didn't
have these problems.
I -- I felt that our problems
were confined, contained,
you know, to our household.
>> Just you.
>> And as we all know, what --
what people see versus
what the reality is,
is often two different things.
But I remember just
feeling that shame as a kid
and when I had this
opportunity to learn from a man
who was making a lot of money,
was giving to philanthropic
endeavors, had a wonderful wife
that he loved and adored,
and children, and --
and an office, and teams of
people who respected him,
I said, "I want more of that.
I want less of what I have and
had, and I want more of that."
So I was ready.
I was in enough -- I
guess enough pain...
>> Yeah.
>> ...you know, emotional
pain to say, "You know,
your way looks like
it's the right path.
The way that I've,
you know, been trained
and taught is not
what I want more of
and I certainly don't want
that for my children."
>> Yeah.
>> When I was old enough to have
children, I was 19 at the time.
>> Looking down -- [laughter].
>> I said I'm willing to --
to learn and to try
something different.
>> So you obviously weren't
afraid of hard work though.
You had a paper route at eight,
you were working at nine.
>> Yeah.
>> So when you got into
the situation with this guy
and he was wonderful enough...
>> Yeah.
>> ...to take you
under his wing,
you busted your behind
didn't you [laughter]?
>> Yeah, the one thing
that I can share,
my father was a cab driver
and he woke up every morning
at 5:00 a.m. was in his cab
at 5:30, worked really hard.
You know, he came home
at night, you know,
for dinner then went back
out and worked, you know,
his cab shift again, ended
up buying his own cab.
And I remember back in -- in
the '70s, he made like $22
or $23,000, his best year
and he bought his own car,
then he bought his
own license to --
to have his own cab
instead of renting a cab.
And he worked really hard and I
saw that he worked really hard.
What I was taught in
addition to putting the time
and the hours in, is there's
a level above working hard
and that's working smart.
And that's learning how
to do the right things
in the right order
at the right time.
And what I've discovered
in the last 30 plus years
is you can work hard,
but working smart beats working
hard every day of the week.
>> This is true.
>> Yeah.
It takes a long time to
really implement that.
You know, what I love about you,
John, is that you are self-made.
You really are.
>> A lot of help.
I've had a lot of help.
>> But you have come from
these adverse situations
and circumstances,
and you have made
for yourself what we saw
you do in  The Secret
where you put the picture of
the house that you were living
in on your vision board
before you were living
in it [chuckles].
>> Yeah.
>> And that was phenomenal.
I mean to be able to do what
you've done now is incredible.
So, tell us a little bit
about some of your Secrets
of Success [chuckles] and how
you've applied Neuroscience
to all of this.
>> Well, the first Secret of
Success and the first thing
that made -- I mean the biggest
difference in my world is,
my brother introduced me to
this gentleman, Allen Brown,
who was the man who
became my first mentor.
And before he agreed to give
me his knowledge, his skills,
his strategies that
he invested 30,
40 years of his life learning
and millions of dollars
of investments, he asked
me this one question.
And the question was,
"Are you interested
in becoming successful and
wealthy, not just financially,
but in every area of your
life or are you committed
to becoming successful in
each area of your life?"
And when I was 19 and he
asked me the question, I said,
"What's -- what's
the difference..."
>> Right, right.
>> "...interest or commitment?"
And he said -- he said, "If
you're interested you're going
to come up with excuses.
You're going to tell me stories.
You're going to tell
me why you can't,
you know, do certain things.
You're going to believe
in your past.
You're going to feel fear and
allow fear to control you.
You're not going to want
to invest in yourself.
You're going to want
to go out and party
at 19 years old instead
of upgrading your skills.
You're going to give me
stories, excuses, circumstance,
and reasons why you can't,
or shouldn't, or won't."
He said, "That is not
the attitude of somebody
who is going to be
mega successful."
He says, "When you're
committed to something,
there's no other option."
He says, "The stories,
the excuses,
the circumstances all go
away and you focus all
of your energy; your mental
energy, your spiritual energy,
your physical energy, all
of that gets realigned
and refocused on how
I can, why I must,
and what will I do
every single day."
And he taught me the
art of commitment,
then he taught me the
art of what I call today,
is fractional goal achievement.
>> Wow [laughter].
>> So fractional
goal achievement,
what's fractional
goal achievement?
>> Fancy title.
>> Yeah. A lot of
people set big goals
and when they see these big
goals, they become overwhelmed
and they have this fear that
they're either not good enough,
not smart enough, don't have the
skills, don't have the strategy,
don't have the people,
don't have the money.
>> How do I get there?
>> And -- and then they
just become ingrained
into that fear and
then they stop.
And he taught me something
really, really valuable.
He said, "We'll start
off with big goals,
but then what we're going
to do is just decide,
"What are you going
to do today?"
Three little things today
to move you towards that --
not 30, not 300, three."
And he taught me this
law of three that said,
"Every day when you wake up,
all I want you to do is write
down the three things
that you're going to do
that are going to
move you closer
to the goal that you want."
So is that learning a new skill?
Is that looking at your goals?
Is that sitting there
and mentally imagining
you already being there?
Is that picking up the
phone and calling somebody?
Is that going to a course?
Just three things a day.
Don't worry about four,
five, six, seven, eight,
or 10 because everybody...
>> Yeah, that's [inaudible].
>> ... knows -- if -- if we look
at all the things that we have
to do, it's overwhelming.
>> Yeah.
>> And he know -- he knew
that if he could just get me
into the habit of
doing my daily three,
then the compounding effect over
the course of a week, 10 weeks,
100 weeks, would send
my life and my results
in a total different
trajectory and he just knew
that I would achieve success
by doing the right things.
>> Do you still use the Law
of Attraction in your life?
Do you still use that
in a different way now?
Has it changed for you?
>> Yeah, my understanding
of the Law
of Attraction really
became even more deepened
after  The Secret  came out.
One of the major problems in
the movie,  The Secret  --
and I love the movie, I love
the cast, I love what it did
for the world, is the premise
in  The Secret  was think,
believe, and you'll achieve.
If you think about even
Napoleon Hill's book, " Think
and Grow Rich ," it says,
"You will become what
you think about most."
I don't agree with either the
think, believe, and achieve,
or you will become what
you think about most.
>> You don't?
>> Nope. I believe that
if you think and believe,
and do the right things
in the right order
at the right time,
you will achieve.
>> So there's a formula
for success?
>> There's a formula.
There's this illusion or
delusion that people have
that if I let's say write my
goals down, I really believe...
>> Yeah.
>> ...and I really have my
heart and soul they will happen.
>> And visualize.
>> And then visualize it and
meditate, and sit, you know,
with my -- my fingers
together like this
that somehow this magical
force in the universe is going
to drop the success, the car,
the person, the money, what --
the relationship of your
dreams onto your lap.
And the truth is, is that
when you have the coherence
of thinking the right thoughts,
believing that you deserve it,
believing that it's possible...
>> Right.
>> ...and then you come
up with the strategies,
what could I be doing,
you know, to move that...
>> Make it happen.
>> ...forward, you know,
we're sitting here
in the studio, right.
There's preparation
that's gone into, you know,
into this interview,
into this exchange.
>> Yes.
>> There's -- there's
people that are working,
doing their job to put the
things in the right order.
There's timelines.
There's investments
that were made.
There was skills and strategies
that you've had to learn,
that I've had to learn.
>> Right.
>> People that are
helping film and edit,
and record have had to learn.
And nobody's there saying,
"Well I hope that magically,
you know, this show appears."
>> [Chuckles] Interesting
because I mean I have --
I was thinking as
you were talking,
things have magically appeared
in my life a few times,
but if I think about it,
they really did have a lot
of consideration and planning,
and different circumstances had
to fall into place
for those to happen.
>> Well, when -- when we're
on the same frequency...
>> In coherence, yes, yes...
>> ...when we're on the
same frequency, if you think
about when you're tuning
into a radio station,
if you tune into let's say
jazz, what you hear is jazz.
If you tune into classical,
what you hear is classical.
If you all of a sudden combine,
you know, classical and rock
and roll, you have half of each
station all you have is noise...
>> [Inaudible].
>> ...you'd have this sound
that you wouldn't want to hear.
>> Yeah.
>> And so, part of
achieving success is getting
that coherence and when
you're in coherence,
when you are certain about the
outcome you want to achieve,
when you really have this
feeling inside that you believe
that you can do it,
that you deserve it,
that you're good enough,
that you're smart enough,
that you can find the solutions,
and you develop the path
on the way to achieving
that goal,
what you find coincidentally
are other people
who are also listening to that
same station on that same path.
>> Yeah.
>> The definition of coincidence
is when two angles coincide.
So while you're on your path and
other people are on their path,
and you're on the sane
coherent frequency...
>> It is.
>> It's kind of like, "Oh wow."
>> Intentional, right.
>> It's intentional.
>> We're going to learn
about some of these tips
and tools that you teach.
>> Yeah.
>> I -- I first want you to take
a look at what John shows just
to really set the stage
in what he teaches.
Take a look at this video.
[ Video ]
[ Music ]
[ Music and Inaudible
Conversations ]
[ Music ]
>> It sets the stage for what
we're going to learn here.
So we talked about coincidence.
We talked about things lining
up, coherence, intention.
I mentioned at the beginning,
we know all of those
things, but we need the why.
Why is that so important
and then we're going
to get into the details.
But why is the why so important?
>> When you think about life,
everybody has challenges
and everybody has mornings they
don't want to get out of bed
and we have occurrences
that are just not
to our taste, and
things go wrong.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> I mean when we look at --
what does success look like?
A lot of people think that
success looks like, "Here I am
and then it's a straight
line up to here."
>> [Laughter] Yeah.
>> And what do all
successful people really know,
that success goes like
this; up, down, left, right,
back down, left right, up down.
>> Look at a stock,
yeah [laughter].
>> Exactly and so when
we talk about the why,
my personal belief
is that every one
of us has a reason
why we're here.
So there's something that
we're supposed to do here.
There's a -- a piece of
knowledge, a product, a service,
a gift that we're here
to deliver to the world
to make the world
a better place,
but also to give our
lives more meaning,
more purpose, and
more fulfillment.
So when you think about like why
are you doing what you're doing,
once you get past because
I need to pay my mortgage
or my rent, I need to eat.
>> Yeah.
>> I need to feed my children...
>> Okay.
>> ...what happens
when times get tough
and I promise every
person they will.
>> Yeah.
>> If you're why isn't
bigger than just yourself,
if you don't have a bigger
social or moral purpose,
if you can't see that the
person that you're helping,
whatever it is that
you're helping them with,
also effects their
children, effects their --
the dry cleaner that they get
their clothes dry cleaned at,
or the grocery store that
they buy their food from,
or how they fit into
the whole of humanity,
then you don't have
enough leverage
to get past your own challenges.
>> So if someone wants to change
their financial, you know,
income and say make $100,000
more a year and they put things
into place in order to make
that happen, you're saying
that if they don't have the --
the real emotional reason as
to why that money is important,
it pretty much won't appear.
>> Well, they won't
have the motivation.
And I want to break the word
"motivation" into two things;
the motive for action.
>> Okay.
>> Right? So what is your
motive to take action
when you don't feel like it?
What's your motive
to take action
when you're just
having a lousy day?
What's your motive
to take action
when things aren't working the
way you expected them to work?
>> You go back to
default patterns.
>> You go back to default
patterns and if it's only you
that you're thinking
about or if it's --
it's only your immediate
family you're thinking about,
that might be one
level of motivation,
but when you can go
beyond your own motivation,
when you can say, "Hey
if I don't get up,
then I'm affecting five,
10, 20, 50 other people,
100 other people or affecting
five, 10, 50, 100 other people,"
you don't have the
leverage to be selfless.
So when you come up with
a big enough why you tend
to do the things you
don't want to do.
So imagine this.
Imagine if we set a goal, any
goal, whether it was to be
in the best physical
shape of our lives,
to make an extra $3,000 or
$2,000 or $10,000 a month
and imagine if I said to you,
"If you don't achieve that goal
by a year from now, you will
never see the person you love
the most in the world."
>> Yeah.
>> All of a sudden, the way you
would think would be different.
All of a sudden...
>> Absolutely.
>> ...who you would ask for
help would be different.
>> Absolutely.
>> All of a sudden if you had
a lousy day, you'd go, "Uh-oh,
if I don't use today to move
forward towards achieving
that goal, I'm possibly
not going to see
that person that I love."
So when we talk about why,
we're actually looking
for bigger leverage points
for ourselves not just
to keep us motivated
when everything's okay,
but to keep us motivated and in
action when things don't work
out the way that
we want them to.
>> That changes the game.
>> It changes the game.
>> Completely, yes.
>> And -- and so whenever
we help people set goals,
one of the main parts of
setting a goal is asking,
"Why do you want
to achieve that?"
And usually people say, "Well,
it's because we want
financial freedom."
>> Right.
>> And we say, "Well why do
you want to achieve that?"
"Well, because we
-- we don't want
to have the stress in our life."
>> Right.
>> We say, "Well, great why
do want to achieve that?"
"So, like we can have
some calmness and peace."
And we say, "Well, why would
you want to achieve that?"
So if we can go deeper,
and deeper, and deeper,
into the why, then we
could start to come
up with reasons beyond
ourselves.
And in all of the
research by the way,
around what people want most,
when you initially ask people,
"Do you want to be happy or do
you want to make more money?"
90% of the people say
they want to be happy.
>> Yeah.
>> And 10% say that
they want more money.
However, when you
then say to them,
"But if we gave you a million
dollars, then would you be able
to still be happy and do
more with that money?"
And 90% of the people switch
and say, "You know what?
I want to make more money,"
because then they could
still do more with it...
>> Right.
>> ...which would give them
what, more fulfillment,
more purpose and more meaning
in their lives, which at the end
of the game, what do we
-- what do people want.
>> More time.
>> I want more time to do the
things that I really want to do.
>> More connection.
>> I want to get
more connection.
I want to have a feeling
like my life matters
and how does your life matter?
Well, after a certain point of
eating at the best restaurants
in the world and traveling to
the nicest places in the world,
then you start to
look for other ways
to give your life
purpose and meaning.
And usually, people look for
ways to help; their friends,
their family, charities, causes.
>> Make a bigger difference.
>> Absolutely, yeah.
>> And so, why not start
with making a bigger
difference initially?
Why not set that as
the initial goal.
The reason I want to earn more
and the reason I'm willing
to become more, is so that I
can make a bigger difference
and in making a bigger
difference,
I'm willing to upgrade
my knowledge.
my skills.
I'm willing to get up earlier.
I'm willing to overcome
my fears.
I'm willing to become
more of who I can become
because now I have
a goal, a vision,
a mission that's
bigger than just me.
>> Yep, absolutely, so well put.
I'm so glad you're here.
I want to take a look at this
next video, which really shows
in -- in kind of a story
format, of what it means
to change the inner
versus the outer game.
Take a look at this.
[ Video ]
>> [Phone ringing and roaring
noise] What should I do?
>> [Background Music]
Like Jenn here,
you can retrain your
brain from the inside out.
Change the program.
Change the wiring.
Change the matrix.
Change the cortex.
>> Oh, come on, Pythagoras.
>> Morpheus.
>> I've done affirmations
before.
I have a list of goals.
I've taken every wealth and
business course out there.
>> It's all been old
school learning, Dave.
You've been operating solely
at the conscious level
and you have essentially
accomplished well, nothing.
[Background Music] You've been
wasting your precious time.
Here is your deeper
unconscious implicit beliefs
that are the real
drivers in your life.
>> We are within normal
self-image limits.
>> They, in addition to your
unconscious fears are stopping
you and you cannot even see it.
We all have these
internal dialogues
on what we really believe and
what really pulls us back,
exchanges between the
unconscious inner beliefs
of our secret self, and
our outer conscious beliefs
and desires.
>> I am smart.
>> Am I really good enough?
>> I am wealthy.
>> Am I smart enough?
>> I make a contribution
to society.
>> I don't know if
I deserve this.
>> And I provide for my family.
>> What if I fail?
>> If I succeed ...
>> [Banging sound] You
must retrain your brain
from the inside out.
Like Jenn, you must inner-cize.
You must break down
any old beliefs.
Prune the connections
that do not serve you.
Then create new, powerful
beliefs and habits,
new neural connections just
like a software programmer
would change a program
on your computer.
You will literally rewire
and retrain your brain
to higher levels of thought.
Recalibrate your
financial thermostat.
>> My financial thermostat?
>> Your comfort zone
is set to a very,
shall we say, average income.
You can change that.
Science has literally given us
the blueprint showing us exactly
how to use the precise
tools, technology
and recognizing proven
methodologies
like guided hypnotherapy
and visualizations,
subliminal programming,
guided meditations,
cognitive priming techniques
and new research we are
conducting using advanced 3D
brain and training technologies.
When all these are
working together,
the resulting system
is so effective,
that even if you only
commit a few minutes a day,
you can take charge
of your powerful brain
and your financial future.
Imagine the power you will feel.
Release those old destructive
thought patterns and behaviors
and replace them with ones
that will help you achieve the
financial reality you desire
and deserve.
You can increase
your comfort zone
so you can allow more
financial wealth.
>> Only self-general
nebula is creeping out.
>> You're freaking me out.
>> No, Dave, you're
freaking yourself out.
Since we've not yet
increased your comfort zone,
your brain is trying to
pull you back and lie.
>> This program isn't
right for me.
>> I don't have time for this.
The timing is not good.
I am too busy.
I can't afford this.
>> I'll think about it
and get back to you.
>> [Background Music] Have
you ever had a nightmare
that you were so sure was real?
What if you were unable to
wake from that nightmare?
How would you know
the difference
between the real world and
the limited one you created?
How could you escape
your enslavement
and realize the world
of your dreams?
More money, a better job,
the ability to help others,
freedom for you and
your family, yes --
you'll have a moment of clarity.
Jump into the rabbit
hole with me.
This is your last chance, Dave.
You take the blue
pill, the story ends.
You fall back asleep to
wake up in your small bed,
to your old life, and believe
whatever you want to believe.
You take the green pill and
you actively participate
in winning the game of money.
Even for a few minutes a day and
you'll enter into wonderland,
freedom, all possibilities.
Remember, all I'm
offering is the ability
to reprogram your mind,
uncorrupt your programming
and create the success and
world you want to live in.
[ Music ]
[ Silence ]
>> All right, so this is great.
This is a whole spoof
on  The Matrix ,
but it's -- I loved
that movie...
>> Yeah.
>> ...because there's so many
teaching moments in that movie.
I like that you took it
into the level of teaching.
All right, a little bit about
the inner and the outer game
that you talked about
in there, on achieving
and resetting the
financial set point.
>> Sure.
>> Just like a body has
a weight set point, it --
it struggles to survive
through that particular weight
or thinks it's going to
die unless it survives that
and if it gets --
yeah, so how do you do
that when it comes to money?
>> Well, there's something
that brain research
called Automaticity.
And Automaticity
is our designer,
God's way of taking anything
that we have repeatedly heard,
or done, or experienced over,
and over, and over again,
and it's made automatic so we
don't have to think about it.
So if you think about
a thermostat, you know,
in the room that we're
sitting in right now,
there's a set thermostat.
Okay, a set temperature
that the thermostat is on,
any time that there's either
heat or cold air that would come
into this room, it would send
a signal to the wiring system
for the furnace, to either turn
up the air conditioning
or turn on the heat.
That's called a cybernetic
mechanism.
Well, every single person
has set points whether it's a
financial set point,
relationship set point,
health set point, weight
set point, etcetera,
and if we follow that
pattern over and over again,
it just becomes automatic.
And so what people don't
understand is unless you rewire
the set point, what's actually
causing most of the perceptions,
thought patterns, and behaviors
that keep you at that level,
you end up with more of the
same every week, every month,
every quarter, every year.
>> So you make the same
amount of money over and over,
you go on the same types --
a couple of vacations a year
or not, or -- I mean you
just do that consistently...
>> Yeah.
>> ...until something
burning inside
of you desires you to change it.
>> Well, there -- the first
part is to recognize that most
of what we're thinking about,
most of what we're doing
is just a repetition
of what we've been
thinking about and doing
for a year, five
years, 10 years.
If you ask yourself, "Are you
in the same place you are today
as you were five years ago?"
Most people would say,
"More or less the same."
There's a few things
that have changed...
>> Right.
>> ...but most people don't
have serious jumps, okay,
in their weight and
serious weight losses.
Most people don't have
serious jumps in their income
or serious losses under
normal circumstances.
Now, we can argue that
based on the economy
and certain circumstances.
But for the most part,
we have these set points,
okay, that we're used to.
People who had a lot of money
before the recession have been
busting their behinds to get...
>> To get back there.
>> ...back their money.
>> Yes.
>> People who didn't have
any money, they're really --
you know, nothing's
changed for them, you know.
And so what the brain is
supposed to do; number one,
is to look for things
that are pleasurable.
So we look to set
goals and we look to,
you know, to look better.
We look at TV ads or
-- or pictures and say,
"Oh God, I'd love that."
And that's because it
makes the brain feel good.
>> To improve.
>> Okay.
>> But the other part of the
brain is keeping us stuck
at a certain level of income,
at a certain relationship,
at a certain weight,
at a certain everything
because it's role is
to conserve energy
and maintain comfort zones.
So if anything is
risky, fearful,
potentially harmful
to us, it says what?
Well, it's going to take
too much energy to change
so I'm just going to
stay in my comfort zone
and just keep doing
what I'm always doing.
>> Because the change will
threaten the survival?
>> Right. As soon as we
have to take upon anything
that requires brain
power, the brain says...
>> Additional brainpower.
>> ..."No, I'm a
conservation machine,
not an energy expenditure
machine."
And I don't want to call the
brain a machine but from a...
>> Yeah.
>> ...the way it works...
>> Oh yeah.
>> ...is conservation of energy.
Look for things that
are pleasurable,
eliminate anything that's
risky, fearful, or dangerous.
And so when we say, "I want to
go from this amount of income
to that amount of
income," all of a sudden,
we have to change what we think.
We might have to learn
some new knowledge.
We might have to
upgrade our skills.
We might have to go
through repetition, okay,
which actually takes work.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> And most people are not
willing to pay the switch cost,
the cost between where they are
and the discomfort of change.
>> Oh, the cost of the comfort,
the cost of your
personal comfort zone.
>> You got it.
So we call that the switch
cost, switching from this
to that takes energy,
takes effort,
takes being uncomfortable,
and we're not wired
to be uncomfortable.
>> Right.
>> We're not wired to do that.
>> No, we're wired
to be comfortable.
>> We're wired for automaticity,
for conservation of energy.
>> Yes.
>> So we don't mind
setting goals.
We don't even mind
reading books.
But when you think about how
much knowledge do you really
gain from reading a book?
Well, you don't gain a lot of
knowledge, you gain awareness.
>> True.
>> Right? It's only through
the studying, the repetition,
the application of
the information...
>> Actually doing it.
>> ...it's a book, a CD,
a program that you go
through that allows you to
create the neuro pathway
and the receptivity
for change to happen.
What most people are not
aware of are the signals
that their body is giving
them, warning them --
okay, like for example,
if something's wrong
in your engine, our cars today
will have a light that pops up.
Our new cars will have
a light that pops up.
Well, most people, you know,
don't take a hammer
and hit the light.
>> Right [laughter].
>> Okay, most will go, "Huh.
There's a light, a signal
that's come up on my dashboard.
Let me take out to the
mechanic to see what's going on.
Let me open up the hood,
look underneath the hood
to see what's causing
the light."
>> Right.
>> Well, when we have
these emotions of doubt,
these feelings of fear...
>> Fear.
>> ...when we have
these emotions of guilt,
or of being embarrassed, or
ashamed, these are signals
that something in the
engine, okay, is triggering.
Most people don't take the time
to recognize why is
this feeling here?
What's causing this feeling?
Why do I want to revert back to
my old self, my old thinking?
What's that compelling pull-back
feature that everybody has?
And so, one of the first keys to
any growth, any financial growth
or any type of growth, is
to recognize the emotions,
the feelings, the
thoughts, the body sensations
that feel uncomfortable.
Most people feel
that discomfort...
>> Yes, yes.
>> ...and they move
away from it.
>> Right, they run from
it and out from it, yes.
>> Right. But if we
think about this,
how does a firefighter
learn to run into...
>> Right.
>> ...a fire when
everybody else's running out?
>> Running out, yeah.
>> Well, they start off
by teaching them,
okay, how fires work.
You know, the fires
require oxygen.
What causes them, you
know, to gain momentum?
What causes them to dissipate?
And they start off
with little fires
and they learn the basics
and the fundamentals.
And then, with some knowledge,
some skills, some application...
>> Practice.
>> ...and practice, they
start to upgrade their level
of awareness, confidence,
and certainty.
And when you raise your level
of awareness and confidence
and certainty, instead of
reacting, you learn to respond.
>> So when you have that
picture that you put
on your vision board of
the house that you wanted,
did you have any idea how
you were going to get that?
>> No.
>> No idea?
>> As a matter of fact, when I
used to look at that picture,
I mean the only relationship
to that picture
that I had was watching
Lifestyles of the Rich
and Famous with Robin Leach.
>> Yeah.
>> And I was taught
something different though.
You see, when most
people look at a picture
of the home they want, or the
spouse that they'd like to have,
or the car, or the charity they
want to, you know, help support,
or the school they
want to help build,
because they don't know how,
that triggers a fear
response in their brain.
And the fear response
says, "Well,
you don't know how to do this.
You don't know the strategies.
You don't know the tactics."
>> Right.
>> "You're not smart enough."
>> Right, right.
>> "You're not good enough."
And as soon as that happens,
it actually will shut
down the genius part
of your brain
which we now know is the
left-prefrontal cortex.
The part of your brain that
is able to imagine solutions,
"Well, maybe I can do this."
>> Wow.
>> "Maybe I could do that.
Maybe I could get some help.
Who could I find that
might have this knowledge?"
What most people
do or what happens
to most people is they look
at something they want,
and they set a goal that they
want, and the first thing
that our brain does, is it
goes into the memory banks
of the brain and it
remembers another time --
or two or 10 or 100
where you set a goal
and maybe you haven't
achieved it.
>> Yeah.
>> And it brings all of those
memories into the present moment
of consciousness and then you
feel the memory of the past
in the present moment.
But that's not where it stops.
Your brain then moves to
the right prefrontal cortex
and projects into the future
all the potential danger
and risk and emotional pain.
And so if you think
about a dot --
a point, imagine arriving at
a point and if you go right,
it's going to be a
negative experience.
If you go left, it's going
to be a -- an experience...
>> Positive.
>> ...a possibility
and positivity.
Most people haven't
been taught to A --
recognize that point where the
emotion is telling you there's
something dangerous, or fearful,
or potentially risky for you.
Most people feel that
and automatically,
they go to the default setting
of fear, risk, danger, and pain.
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> But through awareness
of, "Here's the light
that just got triggered
within me,"
now I can choose to
override my past.
I can now choose to
respond by saying, "Hold on.
It's a feeling.
It's not reality.
It's a potential reality."
But let's say I go to the
left prefrontal cortex
and I use the part of my
brain that allows me to come
up with possibilities.
>> Imaginative, creative
possibility.
>> Imagine -- so,
who can I call?
Who can I talk to?
What could I read?
What could I search on Google?
>> How can I look
at this differently?
at this differently
and go down that path...
>> Yeah, yes.
>> ...not react, okay,
versus going down the path
of automatic, okay,
automatic desire
to avoid pain and any risk?
>> This is why tools
and techniques that come
from your research
and background are
so completely helpful.
>> Absolutely.
>> And I love learning.
Then we're going to take another
video with tools and techniques
and specifics of goal setting.
Take a look.
>> Here is where I see
that most people get
into a challenging,
challenging time.
They have horrific, terrible
habits around strategies,
tactics, and process
to achieve their goals.
And so, they don't
have the consistency,
or the right habits, or
daily rituals of two things.
Number one; they don't have
the daily rituals of thinking
about their goals
on a daily basis.
Now, you may think about why
does that make any difference.
Well, it makes all the
difference in the world
because as soon as you
develop the habit to focus
on what you've written
down as a goal,
you're creating a neurological
pattern, almost a map
of your new goal in your brain.
And then your brain starts to
see things in the physical world
that match up with the goal.
Most people never
write their goals down
and that is problem number two.
That's one of the second
biggest mistakes people make.
They don't take the time
to write it down clearly
and precisely, and so they
think that they have some goals,
or they write it
down once or twice
and they never look at it again.
That's one of the biggest
fundamental mistakes,
number two, that people make.
What I want you to do is I want
you to write your goals down
and I want you to develop
a plan, a little blueprint.
Think about this, if you were to
get on an airplane and you want
to go from where you live
right now and you want to go
across the ocean somewhere.
Wouldn't you demand that first
you have the destination,
the goal, and then
secondly, that the pilot
and the airline would
have the strategy for how
to get you there, the
tactics how to get you there,
and the process to make sure
that everything was safe?
And wouldn't you want them
to have the habits of going
through this checklist
and focusing on exactly
where they wanted to get you to
and what the process
was every single time?
Well, what I found is most
people don't have the right
daily habits or rituals
to achieve the goals
that they want.
They have hopes and dreams
but they're also
locked in a habit loop.
And a habit loop is something
that you just get accustomed
to doing every single day.
Now, for the most part, yours
and my brain is really lazy.
And for those of you
that know my work,
I'm all around the neuro
science of maxi achiever,
the neuro science of how do we
get people to think differently?
How do we get people
to behave differently
and most importantly, how do we
get people to create the habits
that are duplicatable and
replicatable every single day?
And one of the things that
I can share with you based
on the latest neuro science
research is that the habits
that you have right now are
specifically geared towards
helping you achieve everything
you've achieved right now.
So if you want to break
free to two or three or four
or five times more income or
a different, you know, weight,
or a better relationship, you
have to break the habit loop
that is causing you to think
and behave a certain way.
And let me share with you
a very simple process.
Every day, when you wake
up, whatever time it is,
certain things are triggered
and you have the same triggers
that cause the same routines
that give you the same rewards.
So you have a trigger,
a routine, and a reward.
Now, what is a trigger?
A trigger can be waking up.
A trigger can be
the phone ringing.
A trigger can be you
wanting, you know, coffee.
Okay? Because you used --
you're used to getting
coffee every single morning.
Well, if you can learn that
all habits are, are triggers,
routines, and rewards,
neurologically,
something triggers you
thinking a certain way.
Something triggers you
behaving a certain way
and that behavior gives you a
reward, when you understand how
to identify your triggers
and you understand how
to change your routine, all of
the latest research suggests
that we don't have to change
the trigger or the reward.
But if you can change
the routine,
then you can keep the --
the ends of the trigger
and the reward the same.
So what does that look like?
So let's say you wake
up in the morning
and the first thing you do is
you look at your cell phone
to see what emails
you've got coming in.
So why would you do that?
Well, you've done that or you do
that because you're
habituated into doing it.
So there is a trigger,
a routine, and a reward.
So every time you look at it
and you communicate whether it's
text or whether it's responding
to an email or checking the news
or sports score that you like,
something triggers it.
You pay attention, you do the
routine, and you get the reward
of getting that satisfaction,
the satiation point.
Well, one of the things that
we know you have to do in order
to earn two, or three, or four,
or five times more income,
is you have to break the
habit of being yourself,
all of your habits, you
have garnered and gained
over the last 10,
20, 30, 40, 50 years.
And so in order to
achieve a different result,
you have to break the habits
that have got you thinking
and behaving the same
way every single day,
every single week,
every single month.
If you set goals and you create
the strategies, the tactics,
and the processes, these
are all left-brain --
we call deductive
reasoning abilities
or imaginative abilities.
But the habits are what drive
the behavior every single day.
And so we talk about achieving
goals, this part of the equation
up here is the setting of the
goals and setting of the plan.
Most people stop right
over here or they think
that if they set their
goals, that habits are going
to automatically follow.
They don't for longer than a
day or two, or three, or four,
because all of the decisions
and the behavior for a day,
or an hour, or a week,
is based on will power.
>> Okay. So that's great,
setting strategies
is a great idea.
But what happens when you
set these new strategies
up and they don't work?
What if you have a great new
plan to do something and you go
after this new venture and it's
a moneymaker, and then it fails?
>> Well, if you think
about Edison
in inventing the light bulb,
when somebody asked him,
you know, "How did you deal
with so many failures?"
He said, "I didn't fail,
you know, 1799 times.
I discovered 1799 ways
that it didn't work."
>> Which led into the
one way that it did.
>> Which led him to the
one way that it works.
The meaning that we give
anything determines how we feel
about it so there's a real
big difference between,
"I'm a failure," and
something that I tried
or something that I did failed.
If success was easy,
nobody would fail
but what happens is that, you
know, we try different things.
We have our imagination.
We have different skills
and different tools
to try different
combinations, recipes, okay,
some work, some don't.
And if you're an
alchemist, okay, and --
and you're trying
different things,
then somethings will work
out great but many will not.
And so one of the keys
is how resilient are you
in not taking it
personally, number one,
but then getting back
up and trying it again.
The other is how resourceful
are you because a lot
of people say that, you know,
in order to make
money, you need money.
No, you don't.
There are other people
who have money.
There's other people
who have ideas.
There are so many different
ways to be resourceful.
>> You didn't.
>> Yeah, I know.
I started with, you
know, negative accounts.
>> Yes.
>> The key around failure
is once we've recognized
that something that
we've done hasn't worked,
it's really important
to learn the art
of not taking it personally.
You could own the
reality that you did it
but that doesn't
define who you are.
Why don't you reserve judgment?
I tell this to people all
the time, reserve judgment
on whether you are a success
or a failure to the last breath
of your life because in
the middle of the journey,
there's again highs, lows, ups,
and downs, things that work,
things that don't,
and when we fail
at something, we're learning.
And we can either learn
on our own or learn
from the experiences of others.
>> Now, you have had, I think
five multi-million dollar
companies where you've created,
you started, and completed,
and started and you have
several of them still.
What do you attribute
to your success?
>> Well, as you say that,
I want people to also know
that in the five or six
multi-million dollar companies
that I've built, I've
had a couple of failures
that would make most
people cry...
>> Yes.
>> ...where I've
let people down.
I've lost millions of dollars,
hurt my self-esteem, hurt my --
my beliefs about myself,
hurt me personally
for a short period of time.
So in the midst of the losses
and the failures and the errors
in judgment, what
I've discovered is
that there are recipes that are
mind-set recipes, ways to look
at things, beliefs
that you can have,
perceptions of seeing the world
and things that don't work,
perceptions and ways
to behave with people
that really work all the time
and habits, success habits
that when you repeat those on
an on-going basis, your chances
for success increase
exponentially.
In conjunction with the
inside stuff, the inner gain,
there are things whether it's
in the real estate market,
the stock market, the business
market, the collectible market,
any of the businesses, the
finance businesses that we have,
there are fundamentals that when
you stick with the fundamentals
and then you layer on top of
that, more advanced strategies,
over a long enough period
of time, you will win.
What, unfortunately, happens
for most people is they don't
have enough experience or wisdom
to know that it's
just a matter of time.
>> Oh [chuckles].
>> And so I'll give you
an example is, you know,
we're just coming out of one
of the worst economic times
that most people in our age
group have ever encountered.
>> That's right.
>> So we had the
Depression of '29, you know,
we had several major
depressions.
>> Right.
>> And then we had, you know,
19 -- I'm sorry, 2008, 2009,
where things just went...
>> Yes.
>> ... to all hell
in a hand basket.
Well, how is it that some
people with experience
and knowledge became
more wealthy in...
>> During those times.
>> ...during those times?
Well, they had the knowledge
and experience of history
and recognizing patterns.
Success, if you've been
around the game long enough,
leaves clues and
leaves patterns.
The wise people follow patterns.
The inexperienced mind and
brain sees the pattern,
becomes fearful, and then reacts
versus responds based on wisdom
and knowledge in history.
>> So you take it
all into account.
You don't have a judgment on
whether it's successful or not.
You just move forward and you
use the wisdom that you gained
to create something really...
>> I was just for a walk on
the beach a couple of days ago
with a gentleman that lives
in Los Angeles that used
to manage billions of dollars.
And he's made hundreds
of millions
of dollars himself,
managed billions.
And some years, you
know, his fund --
his hedge fund was
making 30, 40, 50, 60,
70% on billions of dollars.
>> Wow.
>> One year just several years
ago, probably like 2009, '10,
he lost 75% of the whole fund
in three months, three months.
>> Wow.
>> And then he got out and then
when the market started
getting better,
started reinvesting again
and he's almost back
to where he was.
>> Oh my goodness.
>> Now, what changed?
Well, wisdom told him when to
get out and wisdom gave him...
>> When to get back in.
>> ...the idea of when
to get back in and then
because he had experience,
he was able to recover
and recapture.
Well, he didn't just
run scared...
>> Or crumble because
of that [inaudible].
>> ...or crumble.
He just took it as a
short period of time
and what do we know about life?
There's highs, there's
lows, there's good times,
there's challenging times,
there's good markets,
there's bad markets.
>> Yeah.
>> And when we learn how
to watch the rhythm of life
and not react to it...
>> Yeah.
>> ...during the tough
times, and we learn how
to manage the good times,
now we can have less
of the highs and the lows...
>> Yes.
>> ...and more of
the equilibrium.
>> Yes. I remember once hearing
that you cannot run your
business with emotion.
The highs, the lows, the drama
should not affect your business
and your life.
It's actually good advice
for life as well [chuckles].
>> It's good advice
for life as well.
>> Thank you so much.
You're just gems of wisdom.
I love looking at success from
a neuro scientific perspective
because it really shows us
the habits and the patterns
that we -- that we fall prey
to and that we also can be
in charge of in order
to be the captain
of our success ship [laughter].
>> Absolutely.
>> Thank you.
>> And -- and the
key really is --
is if you just think of four
Rs, we've talked about a couple
of them is Recognize
what triggers you,
positive or negative.
Refrain the negative
things into positive.
Release whatever you need
to release, forgive quickly,
you know, yourself and others
and release the things
that don't serve you.
And then learn how
to Retrain your brain
so that you have a
more positive outlook
and that you're doing
the right things
in the right order
at the right time.
>> Well, I am really happy that
you're here [background noise].
Here's another R [laughter].
>> I'm really happy to be here.
>> [Laughter] Thank you
so much, John Assaraf.
What a -- what a pleasure
and so much wisdom
that you've brought
to the show today.
Thank you.
>> Thank you so much.
>> And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
of John Assaraf or share it
with your friends, better yet,
go to Gaiamtv.com for a lot more
thought provoking interviews
and inspirational
films, as well.
Go to Gaiamtv.com
and until next time,
I invite you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]